Advance disclosure of security vulnerabilities (#3259)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-advance-security-disclosure.md

the fix as soon as the vulnerability is announced. All other users will know
about the vulnerability only at the moment of public disclosure.

The WG thinks this model is not sufficient anymore:

* Nowadays there are more toolchain providers than the Rust project itself and
  the subset of Linux distributions who are part of that mailing list.
  Providing early disclosure just to [distros@vs.openwall.org][distros] results
  in some Rust users not having a fixed toolchain they can update to whenever a
  vulnerability is announced.

* Large production users have internal builds of the Rust toolchain, and they
  need to allocate personnel to update it and rebuild their Rust projects
  whenever the vulnerability is disclosed. Announcing vulnerabilities out of
  nowhere hinders their ability to plan that work.

This RFC proposes changes to the security policy to help with those cases.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

The security policy will be extended to include two kinds of early
notifications sent before public disclosure of security vulnerabilities.

The Rust Security Response WG will aim to send them 5 business days ahead of

> public disclosure, or 1 business day ahead of public disclosure in case of
> critical, actively exploited vulnerabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
public disclosure, but may at its option shorten this timeline (up to and including immediate/concurrent disclosure) in the event of critical, actively exploited vulnerabilities. The WG will use its best judgment to minimize harm to users, and may take into account whether mitigations are available for users to apply in lieu of a fix.
```

Let's not give anyone grounds to say "you said you'd give us at least a day!"; there are circumstances where we might consider *immediate* disclosure, such as for a critical and actively exploited vulnerability that has a simple mitigation people can apply to protect themselves. We shouldn't pre-commit to withholding that mitigation from users in order to provide more advance disclosure time.

Author: Added this to the "Logistics of the notification" section:

> For actively exploited critical vulnerabilities that do not require a toolchain update to be effectively mitigated, no advance notification will be sent.                                                                        

The sentence in the guide-level explanation is already technically incorrect as the reporter might not allow us to pre-announce the vulnerability. I'd like to keep the guide-level explanation more about the big picture rather than including all details there.

Reviewer 2: Maybe just add a parenthetical like "(subject to caveats discussed below)"?

Author: Good call Niko, added "(subject to caveats discussed in the reference-level explanation)".

## Advance disclosures

To ensure all Rust users have access to a fixed toolchain, the Rust Security
Response WG will send the full vulnerability details ahead of time to
distributors of the Rust toolchain and maintainers of alternate Rust

> implementation (when applicable), giving them all the information required to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
implementations (when applicable), giving them all the information required to
```

information about those vulnerabilities confidential before public disclosure.

## Security releases pre-announcements

To ensure all Rust users are aware of upcoming security releases, before public
disclosure the Security Response WG will publish a pre-announcement of the
upcoming release on the [public security announces mailing list][announce-ml]
and the [Rust blog][blog], mentioning the planned date and time of the release,
the severity of the vulnerability and the affected part of the project.

This will allow all Rust users to schedule the time to update their toolchain.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## Advance disclosures

### List of notified organizations

The Rust Security Response WG will maintain a list of organizations who are
eligible to receive advance disclosures. Organizations (either companies or
established open source projects) matching any of these criteria can apply:

* Organizations distributing the Rust toolchain (as provided by the Rust
  project) or a fork of the Rust toolchain explicitly meant to be used by their
  external customers or users. Organizations shipping the toolchain just to

>   internal customers/users are not eligible, nor are organizations publicly

Reviewer 4: Why have the caveat for internal users? I imagine a large user could have more internal users than a small public fork. I think that if an org is willing to share evidence that such a toolchain exists with the WG, even if that is not public, then that should be enough to qualify (assuming the org is trustworthy and in good standing, etc).

Reviewer: Any organization could have internal users of Rust, and we can't include every organization that does so. I don't think we should be in the business of defining "big enough" companies in this regard.

Reviewer 4: Its not about internal users, its about an internal fork or internal distribution. I think that is likely to be few enough companies that we could support that. That's different from major players and nothing to do with 'big enough'

Reviewer: Do we actually want to create an incentive for people to create their own internal distribution or fork, though?

Reviewer 4: I don't think this is enough of an incentive to sway people's decision here. People have internal distributions already, the question is how secure we want them to be, and I think we want them to be as secure as possible. (And personally I think we want to incentivise people to use Rust, and whether that is internal only or public (or closed or open source) is secondary)

Reviewer 4: > Doing a small upfront investment in setting up an internal toolchain to continue getting full vulnerability details a week ahead of the public would be an easily justifiable expense, and something I could definitely see happening.

I'm not sure if you're agreeing or disagreeing with me :-) I agree that it should be easy to do this for an internal toolchain, but doing so requires getting the vulnerability notifications, even if there are no external customers.

> The reasoning I had behind this RFC is who your organization would be blocked on to update their projects. If they're only blocked by another team inside the company, the company can probably figure out a way to speed the upgrade up. If instead they're blocked by a third party toolchain vendor there would be no way for them to upgrade until that vendor finished their patches and testing.

I'm not sure I agree with this. In very large companies, if two teams are in different orgs, they may as well be in different companies. Such large companies tend to develop bureaucracy too and become pretty rigid about not releasing internally until all the required testing, etc. is done.

Author: > I'm not sure if you're agreeing or disagreeing with me :-) I agree that it should be easy to do this for an internal toolchain, but doing so requires getting the vulnerability notifications, even if there are no external customers.

What I'm saying is that it's not a huge investment to set up an internal toolchain *with the sole purpose of receiving these notifications*, as long as you don't carry custom patches and you mirror `rust-lang/rust`'s CI configuration as much as possible. I don't think any of the companies maintaining an internal toolchain right now are maintaining it for this reason, but I could see other companies in the future doing that.

The more we share vulnerabilities ahead of time the more risk of leakage there will be, and I don't know of a fair way to define which internal toolchains would benefit off this without the risk of sending notifications to tens of companies as Rust's usage increases.

Reviewer 4: Hmm, I don't think anyone would have an internal toolchain without any changes at all, because what would be the point? :-) At the least, I would expect an internal toolchain to be slightly patched and/or built in some kind of interesting way. In addition to that, it is possible internal toolchain users may want to do some degree of extra testing or verification.

> The more we share vulnerabilities ahead of time the more risk of leakage there will be

This is true, but to counter, I don't think there are likely to be more orgs with internal toolchains than those building their own for external use. I don't think those orgs are likely to be more or less trustworthy re leaking secrets than orgs with external users. I do think that those orgs with internal toolchains are likely to be vulnerable to security exploits (imagine a vuln in AWS or Azure code) and that such orgs are likely to take a long time to deploy re-compiled code. (Again, imagine deploying code to every server at AWS). So, I think although there is increased risk with increased numbers, internal toolchains are not riskier than external ones, and their needs for this kind of timely support may be greater.

> I don't know of a fair way to define which internal toolchains would benefit off this without the risk of sending notifications to tens of companies as Rust's usage increases.

Yeah, I sympathise with this. I'm not sure either. I think there needs to be some establishment of trust, but I'm not sure how to do that in a way that scales even to tens of orgs. Personally, I would leave it up to the WG's discretion - if the org can persuade you they are trustworthy and have a legitimate toolchain (e.g., by being well-respected and showing you the toolchain, or by joining the WG and helping with triage ala LLVM) then add them to the list. If there is any doubt, don't add them. I wouldn't over-index on fair (as long as we're avoiding glaring situations like saying yes to AWS and no to Google or something).

Author: > Hmm, I don't think anyone would have an internal toolchain without any changes at all, because what would be the point? :-) At the least, I would expect an internal toolchain to be slightly patched and/or built in some kind of interesting way. In addition to that, it is possible internal toolchain users may want to do some degree of extra testing or verification.

It would indeed be fairly pointless thinking about just the toolchain itself, but if the "reward" is getting vulnerability reports ahead of time it might start to make more sense (and could be easily disguised as "we're building the binaries ourselves to mitigate trusting trust attacks", which on its own is a reasoning that would make sense).

> This is true, but to counter, I don't think there are likely to be more orgs with internal toolchains than those building their own for external use. I don't think those orgs are likely to be more or less trustworthy re leaking secrets than orgs with external users.

To be clear, I'm not saying that companies maintaining an internal toolchain are bad at keeping secrets from leaking! Each organization we add though, regardless of who they are, increases the chance of accidental leaks.

> I do think that those orgs with internal toolchains are likely to be vulnerable to security exploits (imagine a vuln in AWS or Azure code) and that such orgs are likely to take a long time to deploy re-compiled code. (Again, imagine deploying code to every server at AWS). So, I think although there is increased risk with increased numbers, internal toolchains are not riskier than external ones, and their needs for this kind of timely support may be greater.

Hmm, sure, but this is not specific to companies that maintain an internal toolchain. If a big company has a big internal Rust codebase, but it doesn't have a need to maintain an internal toolchain, they'd still meet the criteria you're mentioning here.

> by joining the WG and helping with triage ala LLVM

In my experience inside the LLVM Security Group, that's not a model that works well (can elaborate in DMs if you're curious).

> I wouldn't over-index on fair (as long as we're avoiding glaring situations like saying yes to AWS and no to Google or something).

The worry I have is that while it's easy to think the tech giants have a good reason for this, due to basically everyone knowing how many critical things they develop, companies that are not Google / Microsoft / Amazon / Meta / Apple might have even more reason to receive advance notification but they simply aren't as known. Saying yes to Google but not AWS might be indeed glaring, but the same could be said for saying yes to AWS but not an aerospace manufacture using Rust in critical software, even though the chance of anyone even knowing the name of that manufacture is fairly small.

  shipping a toolchain primarily meant for internal use.

* Organizations developing an independent implementation of the Rust language,
  not originating from a fork of the toolchain provided by the Rust project.
  The implementation has to be mature, widely used and must follow all policies
  on alternate implementation set by the Rust project (if any are set).

Note that when evaluating the eligibility criteria, the spirit of the rules
will be considered: if the WG thinks an organization that would not be eligible
otherwise is trying to find a loophole to be able to apply, the WG will have
the authority to reject the application.

> 

Reviewer 4: I would have a requirement that an organisation be trustworthy. I realise the WG has final say and that this is impossible to judge objectively, but I think it is useful to have as a guide and to build trust with the community in general that the policy *will* be applied sensibly.

Author: Hmm, I'm not opposed to it, but do you have some criteria in mind to decide whether an organization will be trustworthy?

Reviewer 4: I would not, I would leave that totally to the WG's discretion. I would just add that to the text so there is some expectation that this is an aspect the WG would consider when deciding on whether to include a company in the process

Author: I'm kinda skeptical of a vague criteria, as it risks becoming the catch-all for the WG applying this policy unevenly. Do you think something like "the organization must not have a history of confidentiality violations" would still cover your concerns?

Reviewer 4: Well, vague is kinda bad, but we shouldn't be afraid of explicitly leaving stuff to people's discretion or require over-precise definitions. We are dealing with people, not code, and people are vague and imprecise. I think having a guideline which sets expectations and helps guide the WG to make policy decisions is a good thing. "the organization must not have a history of confidentiality violations" seems necessary but not sufficient. Like if a cyber-crime group applied for the disclosure, you'd want to say 'no' even if they were really good at keeping secrets.

Author: > Like if a cyber-crime group applied for the disclosure, you'd want to say 'no' even if they were really good at keeping secrets.

Ok that's a good example, and it lets me visualize better what you were worried about! I'll have a think about it.

Organizations will be able to apply by opening an issue in the
[rust-lang/wg-security-response] repository, detailing:

* Which of their products or projects would make them eligible to be notified.

* One or more email addresses that should receive the advance disclosure.

* Two or more people that will serve as the organizational contact: those
  people will be contacted by the WG whenever the WG needs to discuss something
  with the organization.

* A pledge to maintain confidentiality, as detailed in the "Confidentiality"
  section of this RFC. The person submitting the application must be authorized
  to enter that pledge on behalf of their organization.

The application process will be public, and the decision will be made by the

> WG: a majority of the WG members needs to be in favor of the organization
> joining, and none of the members needs to be against it. The resulting list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WG: the WG needs to have a consensus in favor of the organization
joining, with none of the members objecting. The resulting list
```

Rust teams don't usually operate by simple majority. I'd expect consensus to imply a little more than that (e.g. on par with our current RFC thresholds).

Author: My understanding of the sentence I wrote is that it represents the same processes we have for RFCs, with the majority of the team members in favor (which with the RFC is `members.len() - 2`) and no team member opposed to it, just spelled a bit more specific. Is your understanding of that sentence different? Happy to clarify the wording if so.

Reviewer: "majority" doesn't describe the standard RFC criteria of "all but 2".

Author: Sure, but "all but 2" wouldn't work for the WG at all, as right now we're only two members :sweat_smile:

Majority expresses the same spirit as "all but 2", while adapting better to different membership counts. In practice it's still consensus as any WG member can object/veto.

Author: Amended the text to be less generic.

> joining, and none of the members needs to be against it. The resulting list
> of notifications receiving advance disclosure will also be public.

Reviewer 5: I think this should be "organizations".

```suggestion
joining, and none of the members needs to be against it. The resulting list
of organizations receiving advance disclosure will also be public.
```

cc @xFrednet if that's the case, this is the answer to your first question :)

Author: Yep, that's a typo on my end, it should be "organizations" here. I'll fix it later.

otherwise be eligible to be notified can be added to the list, if the WG
determines the venue is appropriate, and has sufficient security and
confidentiality practices.

Organizations won't need to pay any fee to receive early notifications, nor
will they have to be a sponsor to the Rust Foundation. There will be no formal
NDA in place, only the informal confidentiality pledge.

Once the application is accepted, the organizational contacts will be able to
request changes to the address receiving the notifications or the list of
contacts by opening another issue.

### Removal from the list

Organizations can be removed from the list in any of these cases:

* The reason why the organization joined the list is not applicable anymore,
  for example if they discontinued their distribution. Organizations can
  re-apply later if they become eligible again.

* The organization did not act on the early notifications it received for an
  extended period of time. The WG will work with the organization to see if
  there are valid reasons for not acting on the notifications before removing
  the organization. Organizations can re-apply later.

> * The organization either accidentally violated confidentiality multiple times
>   without taking appropriate steps to prevent it from happening again, or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The organization either accidentally violated confidentiality more than once,
  without having taken appropriate steps to prevent it from happening again after the first time, or
```

```suggestion
```

Trying to be more explicit here about the point at which we expect people to take appropriate steps to prevent mistakes from happening again.

  intentionally/maliciously violated confidentiality one time. Organizations
  will only be able to re-apply with full consent from the whole Security
  Response WG and Rust Core Team.

The decision will be made by the WG, and can be appealed to the Rust Core Team.

### Logistics of the notification

Advance notifications will be sent to all organizations in the list, containing
the draft advisory and the relevant patches (if available). The timing of the
notification will depend on the impact of the vulnerability:

* For most vulnerabilities, five business days before public disclosure.

> * For actively exploited critical vulnerabilities, one business day before

Reviewer 3: If the urgent period changes in https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3259/files#r865533900 , this will also need to change.

will not result in an advance notification, as there would be no update for the
organizations to prepare in advance.

If a specific vulnerability warrants it, the Security Response WG can also
decide to send advance notifications to other organizations who are not members
of the list, or to send the notification earlier than 5 days ahead of public
disclosure. This will be coordinated with and subject to approval of the person
who reported the vulnerability to the WG.

Depending on the terms of the embargo set by the person who reported the
vulnerability, in a small amount of cases the WG might not be able to send the
early notification without breaking the terms of the embargo. In those cases
the WG will still try to coordinate with the reporter to send a notification to
all the organizations in the list as close to our expected notification times
as possible.

### Confidentiality

All organizations who received an advance notification must treat all the
information they received and all fixes they developed as confidential until
the public disclosure by the WG. The information can only be shared inside the
organization on a need-to-know basis, and can never be shared with people

> external to the organization without the permission of the WG.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
external to the organization without the permission of the WG. Organizations
should handle advance notifications and all associated communications and
materials with at least the same degree of care that they use for
confidential material from partners.
```

Author: Applied a tweaked version of this (reiterated appropriate steps must be taken, otherwise a company could in theory have "YOLO" as their policy for dealing with confidential info).

There will be no formal NDA to sign to start receiving early notifications, but
any violation of confidentiality will still have consequences (see "Removal
from the list").

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Collaboration among Rust project members is not advance disclosure to their companies/organizations

When developing fixes for undisclosed security vulnerabilities, the Rust project typically assembles a small team of Rust project members, based on criteria such as their expertise in a relevant area or their position as a maintainer of a particular component. This represents a trust relationship between the Rust project and those specific project members.

Inclusion of a project member in the process of developing security fixes does *not* constitute disclosure to any company or organization that that project member may work with. Rust project members are expected to maintain confidentiality of security fixes, including from employers and similar organizations they may be a part of. Project members who do not maintain such confidentiality, including members who are prohibited by company/organization policy from maintaining such confidentiality, may be excluded from groups working on sensitive/undisclosed issues.
```

This has arisen as an issue in the past, and we have had incidents of project members feeling that they may have an obligation to disclose information to their employers. Some project members have specifically said it would help them if they had a Rust Project policy they could point their employers to, to take heat off of themselves.

Author: I agree we need to have a policy similar to this one, but I don't think this RFC is the place for it. There were already brief discussions inside the WG about drafting such a policy (after a person pointed out the need for it), and it'd be best to keep it in a separate document than this one. That separate document would also have other information for team members collaborating on security vulnerabilities (such as how to handle information and private repositories).

  after the first violation, or intentionally/maliciously violated
  confidentiality one time. Organizations will only be able to re-apply with
  full consent from the whole Security Response WG and Rust Core Team.

The decision will be made by the WG, and can be appealed to the Rust Core Team.

### Logistics of the notification

Advance notifications will be sent to all organizations in the list, containing
the draft advisory and the relevant patches (if available). The timing of the
notification will depend on the impact of the vulnerability:

* For most vulnerabilities, five business days before public disclosure.
* For actively exploited critical vulnerabilities, one business day before
  public disclosure.
* For actively exploited critical vulnerabilities that do not require a
  toolchain update to be effectively mitigated, no advance notification will be
  sent.

Not all vulnerabilities will result in an advance notification being sent.
Namely, vulnerabilities in the project infrastructure, crates maintained by the
Rust project, or other projects that are not shipped as part of the toolchain
will not result in an advance notification, as there would be no update for the

> organizations to prepare in advance.

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure this is true? If (say) regex needs a security update, users need to prepare to bump just as much as they'd prepare for a toolchain upgrade, IMO.

I think the guiding line is if the update is something we do or users do: if users need to take any action, there should be a similar process for any of those actions IMO.

Author: > I'm not sure this is true? If (say) regex needs a security update, users need to prepare to bump just as much as they'd prepare for a toolchain upgrade, IMO.

This is a relic from a previous draft of this RFC, that didn't include public pre-announcements of vulnerabilities, and doesn't account for [programmerjake](https://github.com/programmerjake)'s mention of distributions also distributing crates in addition to toolchains. I'll update the text shortly.

by the WG could reduce the amount of vulnerabilities shared with us, worsening
the security of the ecosystem as a whole.

The risk of leaks will increase as we notify more organizations ahead of time.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

The pillar that guided the drafting of this RFC is *"make sure every Rust
developer has access to an updated toolchain when the vulnerability is
disclosed"*. This gives all players in the ecosystem the same information
required to address and fix the vulnerabilities, and in the WG's opinion this
is the right balance between sharing with the least amount of people and having
the biggest impact.

The WG considered multiple alternatives, listed below.

## Keep the status quo

Do nothing, and continue with the current policy of only sharing
vulnerabilities ahead of time with [distros@vs.openwall.org][distros]. This
doesn't cover non-Linux distributions of Rust.

## Don't share with anyone

Restrict our policies even more and don't share vulnerabilities ahead of time
with anyone. This would put every Rust developer who doesn't use the toolchain

> provided by the project itself at risk whenever a vulnerability is announced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provided directly by the Rust project itself at risk whenever a vulnerability
is announced.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The use of toolchains not provided directly by the Rust project has use cases that are critical for Rust's adoption in ways we care about. For instance, the use of Rust in place of other languages in operating systems, system-level tooling, and C libraries depends on the ability to build such code using toolchains provided by the same source (in order for distributions to remain self-contained), and not supporting such redistribution would hamper adoption of Rust in these use cases.

```

Author: Added the mention about system-level tooling in distributions, plus a mention of another sector that the Rust-provided toolchains wouldn't be able to cater (qualified industries requiring 10 to 20 years of long-term support for a toolchain).

## Additionally notify big players in the ecosystem ahead of time

In addition to the proposed list of organizations, we could also notify big
players in the ecosystem to make sure products used by a lot of people are
fixed before the vulnerability is known to the general public, and the fallout
from the vulnerability is smaller.

In the WG's opinion, the (small) benefit this would provide to the wider
ecosystem is not worth it compared to the big increase of the risk of leakage
(as we'd need to notify a lot of companies under this program).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In addition, such a policy would require defining "big players", and any such definition would either be too broad (disclosing widely enough to make leaks inevitable) or become a kind of preferential treatment.

```

that are critical for Rust's adoption in areas we care about. Some examples of
those could be:

* The use of Rust in place of other languages in operating systems,
  system-level tooling, and C libraries depends on the ability to build such
  code using toolchains provided by the same source (in order for
  distributions to remain self-contained).

* Some industry sectors (like qualified environments) require toolchains to be
  supported for 10 to 20 years, and it'd be unreasonable for the Rust project
  to provide such long term support on its own, leaving the task to third
  party toolchain vendors.

## Additionally notify big players in the ecosystem ahead of time

In addition to the proposed list of organizations, we could also notify big
players in the ecosystem to make sure products used by a lot of people are
fixed before the vulnerability is known to the general public, and the fallout
from the vulnerability is smaller.

In the WG's opinion, the (small) benefit this would provide to the wider
ecosystem is not worth it compared to the big increase of the risk of leakage
(as we'd need to notify a lot of companies under this program).

> In addition, such a policy would require defining who a "big players" is, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, such a policy would require defining who "big players" are, and
```

Reviewer: Or, if you prefer:

```suggestion
In addition, such a policy would require defining who a "big player" is, and
```

Author: Thanks, fixed.

information they received and all fixes they developed as confidential until
the public disclosure by the WG. The information can only be shared inside the
organization on a need-to-know basis, and can never be shared with people
external to the organization without explicit permission from the WG.

Organizations must take appropriate steps to protect the confidentiality of

> advance notifications and of all comminications and materials associated with

Reviewer 7: *communications
